CHAPTER I. THE RIGHT TO BE RICH.


Whatever may be said in praise of poverty, the fact remains that it is
not possible to live a really complete or successful life unless one is
rich. No man can rise to his greatest possible height in talent or soul
development unless he has plenty of money; for to unfold the soul and
to develop talent he must have many things to use, and he cannot have
these things unless he has money to buy them with.

Man develops in mind, soul, and body by making use of things, and
society is so organized that man must have money in order to become the
possessor of things; therefore, the basis of all advancement for man
must be the science of getting rich.

The object of all life is development; and everything that lives has an
inalienable right to all the development it is capable of attaining.

Man’s right to life means his right to have the free and unrestricted
use of all the things which may be necessary to his fullest mental,
spiritual, and physical unfoldment; or, in other words, his right to be
rich.

In this book, I shall not speak of riches in a figurative way; to be
really rich does not mean to be satisfied or contented with a little.
No man ought to be satisfied with a little if he is capable of using
and enjoying more. The purpose of Nature is the advancement and
unfoldment of life; and every man should have all that can contribute
to the power, elegance, beauty, and richness of life; to be content
with less is sinful.

The man who owns all he wants for the living of all the life he is
capable of living is rich; and no man who has not plenty of money can
have all he wants. Life has advanced so far, and become so complex,
that even the most ordinary man or woman requires a great amount of
wealth in order to live in a manner that even approaches completeness.
Every person naturally wants to become all that he is capable of
becoming; this desire to realize innate possibilities is inherent in
human nature; we cannot help wanting to be all that we can be. Success
in life is becoming what you want to be; you can become what you want
to be only by making use of things, and you can have the free use
of things only as you become rich enough to buy them. To understand
the science of getting rich is therefore the most essential of all
knowledge.

There is nothing wrong in wanting to get rich. The desire for riches
is really the desire for a richer, fuller, and more abundant life; and
that desire is praiseworthy. The man who does not desire to live more
abundantly is abnormal, and so the man who does not desire to have
money enough to buy all he wants is abnormal.

There are three motives for which we live; we live for the body, we
live for the mind, and we live for the soul. No one of these is better
or holier than the other; all are alike desirable, and no one of the
three--body, mind, or soul--can live fully if either of the others is
cut short of full life and expression. It is not right or noble to live
only for the soul and deny mind or body; and it is wrong to live for
the intellect and deny body and soul.

We are all acquainted with the loathsome consequences of living for
the body and denying both mind and soul; and we see that real life
means the complete expression of all that man can give forth through
body, mind, and soul. Whatever he may say, no man can be really happy
or satisfied unless his body is living fully in every function,
and unless the same is true of his mind and his soul. Wherever
there is unexpressed possibility, or function not performed, there
is unsatisfied desire. Desire is possibility seeking expression, or
function seeking performance.

Man cannot live fully in body without good food, comfortable clothing,
and warm shelter; and without freedom from excessive toil. Rest and
recreation are also necessary to his physical life.

He cannot live fully in mind without books and time to study them,
without opportunity for travel and observation, or without intellectual
companionship.

To live fully in mind he must have intellectual recreations, and must
surround himself with all the objects of art and beauty he is capable
of using and appreciating.

To live fully in soul, man must have love; and love is denied
expression by poverty.

Man’s highest happiness is found in the bestowal of benefits on those
he loves; love finds its most natural and spontaneous expression in
giving. The man who has nothing to give cannot fill his place as a
husband or father, as a citizen, or as a man. It is in the use of
material things that man finds full life for his body, develops his
mind, and unfolds his soul. It is therefore of supreme importance to
him that he should be rich.

It is perfectly right that you should desire to be rich; if you are a
normal man or woman you cannot help doing so. It is perfectly right
that you should give your best attention to the Science of Getting
Rich, for it is the noblest and most necessary of all studies. If you
neglect this study, you are derelict in your duty to yourself, to God,
and to humanity; for you can render God and humanity no greater service
than to make the most of yourself.




CHAPTER II. THERE IS A SCIENCE OF GETTING RICH.


There is a Science of getting rich, and it is an exact science, like
algebra or arithmetic. There are certain laws which govern the process
of acquiring riches; once these laws are learned and obeyed by any man,
he will get rich with mathematical certainty.

The ownership of money and property comes as a result of doing things
in a certain way; those who do things in this Certain Way, whether on
purpose or accidentally, get rich; while those who do not do things in
this Certain Way, no matter how hard they work or how able they are,
remain poor.

It is a natural law that like causes always produce like effects; and,
therefore, any man or woman who learns to do things in this Certain
Way will infallibly get rich.

That the above statement is true is shown by the following facts:--

Getting rich is not a matter of environment, for, if it were, all the
people in certain neighborhoods would become wealthy; the people of one
city would all be rich, while those of other towns would all be poor;
or the inhabitants of one state would roll in wealth, while those of an
adjoining state would be in poverty.

But everywhere we see rich and poor living side by side, in the same
environment, and often engaged in the same vocations. When two men are
in the same locality, and in the same business, and one gets rich while
the other remains poor, it shows that getting rich is not, primarily,
a matter of environment. Some environments may be more favorable
than others, but when two men in the same business are in the same
neighborhood, and one gets rich while the other fails, it indicates
that getting rich is the result of doing things in a Certain Way.

And further, the ability to do things in this Certain Way is not due
solely to the possession of talent, for many people who have great
talent remain poor, while others who have very little talent get rich.

Studying the people who have got rich, we find that they are an average
lot in all respects, having no greater talents and abilities than other
men. It is evident that they do not get rich because they possess
talents and abilities that other men have not, but because they happen
to do things in a Certain Way.

Getting rich is not the result of saving, or “thrift”; many very
penurious people are poor, while free spenders often get rich.

Nor is getting rich due to doing things which others fail to do; for
two men in the same business often do almost exactly the same things,
and one gets rich while the other remains poor or becomes a bankrupt.

From all these things, we must come to the conclusion that getting rich
is the result of doing things in a Certain Way.

If getting rich is the result of doing things in a Certain Way, and if
like causes always produce like effects, then any man or woman who can
do things in that way can become rich, and the whole matter is brought
within the domain of exact science.

The question arises here, whether this Certain Way may not be so
difficult that only a few may follow it. This cannot be true, as we
have seen, so far as natural ability is concerned. Talented people get
rich, and blockheads get rich; intellectually brilliant people get
rich, and very stupid people get rich; physically strong people get
rich, and weak and sickly people get rich.

Some degree of ability to think and understand is, of course,
essential; but in so far as natural ability is concerned, any man
or woman who has sense enough to read and understand these words can
certainly get rich.

Also, we have seen that it is not a matter of environment. Location
counts for something; one would not go to the heart of the Sahara and
expect to do successful business.

Getting rich involves the necessity of dealing with men, and of being
where there are people to deal with; and if these people are inclined
to deal in the way you want to deal, so much the better. But that is
about as far as environment goes.

If anybody else in your town can get rich, so can you; and if anybody
else in your state can get rich, so can you.

Again, it is not a matter of choosing some particular business or
profession. People get rich in every business, and in every profession;
while their next door neighbors in the same vocation remain in poverty.

It is true that you will do best in a business which you like, and
which is congenial to you; and if you have certain talents which are
well developed, you will do best in a business which calls for the
exercise of those talents.

Also, you will do best in a business which is suited to your locality;
an ice-cream parlor would do better in a warm climate than in
Greenland, and a salmon fishery will succeed better in the Northwest
than in Florida, where there are no salmon.

But, aside from these general limitations, getting rich is not
dependent upon your engaging in some particular business, but upon your
learning to do things in a Certain Way. If you are now in business, and
anybody else in your locality is getting rich in the same business,
while you are _not_ getting rich, it is because you are not doing
things in the same Way that the other person is doing them.

No one is prevented from getting rich by lack of capital. True, as you
get capital the increase becomes more easy and rapid; but one who has
capital is already rich, and does not need to consider how to become
so. No matter how poor you may be, if you begin to do things in the
Certain Way you will begin to get rich; and you will begin to have
capital. The getting of capital is a part of the process of getting
rich; and it is a part of the result which invariably follows the doing
of things in the Certain Way.

You may be the poorest man on the continent, and be deeply in debt; you
may have neither friends, influence, nor resources; but if you begin to
do things in this Way, you must infallibly begin to get rich, for like
causes must produce like effects. If you have no capital, you can get
capital; if you are in the wrong business, you can get into the right
business; if you are in the wrong location, you can go to the right
location; and you can do so _by beginning in your present business and
in your present location_ to do things in the Certain Way which causes
success.




CHAPTER III. IS OPPORTUNITY MONOPOLIZED?


No man is kept poor because opportunity has been taken away from him;
because other people have monopolized the wealth, and have put a fence
around it. You may be shut off from engaging in business in certain
lines, but there are other channels open to you. Probably it would be
hard for you to get control of any of the great railroad systems; that
field is pretty well monopolized. But the electric railway business
is still in its infancy, and offers plenty of scope for enterprise;
and it will be but a very few years until traffic and transportation
through the air will become a great industry, and in all its branches
will give employment to hundreds of thousands, and perhaps to millions,
of people. Why not turn your attention to the development of aerial
transportation, instead of competing with J. J. Hill and others for a
chance in the steam railway world?

It is quite true that if you are a workman in the employ of the steel
trust you have very little chance of becoming the owner of the plant in
which you work; but it is also true that if you will commence to act
in a Certain Way, you can soon leave the employ of the steel trust;
you can buy a farm of from ten to forty acres, and engage in business
as a producer of foodstuffs. There is great opportunity at this time
for men who will live upon small tracts of land and cultivate the same
intensively; such men will certainly get rich. You may say that it is
impossible for you to get the land, but I am going to prove to you that
it is not impossible, and that you can certainly get a farm if you will
go to work in a Certain Way.

At different periods the tide of opportunity sets in different
directions, according to the needs of the Whole, and the particular
stage of social evolution which has been reached. At present, in
America, it is setting toward agriculture and the allied industries
and professions. To-day, opportunity is open before the farmer in his
line more than before the factory worker in his line. It is open before
the business man who supplies the farmer more than before the one who
supplies the factory worker; and before the professional man who waits
upon the farmer more than before the one who serves the working class.

There is abundance of opportunity for the man who will go with the
tide, instead of trying to swim against it.

So the factory workers, either as individuals or as a class, are not
deprived of opportunity. The workers are not being “kept down” by their
masters; they are not being “ground” by the trusts and combinations
of capital. As a class, they are where they are because they do not
do things in a Certain Way. If the workers of America chose to do so,
they could follow the example of their brothers in Belgium and other
countries, and establish great department stores and co-operative
industries; they could elect men of their own class to office, and pass
laws favoring the development of such co-operative industries; and in a
few years they could take peaceable possession of the industrial field.

The working class may become the master class whenever they will
begin to do things in a Certain Way; the law of wealth is the same
for them as it is for all others. This they must learn; and they will
remain where they are as long as they continue to do as they do. The
individual worker, however, is not held down by the ignorance or the
mental slothfulness of his class; he can follow the tide of opportunity
to riches, and this book will tell him how.

No one is kept in poverty by a shortness in the supply of riches;
there is more than enough for all. A palace as large as the capitol at
Washington might be built for every family on earth from the building
material in the United States alone; and under intensive cultivation,
this country would produce wool, cotton, linen, and silk enough to
clothe each person in the world finer than Solomon was arrayed in all
his glory; together with food enough to feed them all luxuriously. The
visible supply is practically inexhaustible; and the invisible supply
really IS inexhaustible.

_Everything you see on earth is made from one original substance, out
of which all things proceed._

New forms are constantly being made, and older ones are dissolving; but
all are shapes assumed by One Thing.

There is no limit to the supply of Formless Stuff, or Original
Substance. The universe is made out of it; but it was not all used
in making the universe. The spaces in, through, and between the forms
of the visible universe are permeated and filled with the Original
Substance; with the Formless Stuff; with the raw material of all
things. Ten thousand times as much as has been made might still
be made, and even then we should not have exhausted the supply of
universal raw material.

No man, therefore, is poor because nature is poor, or because there is
not enough to go around.

Nature is an inexhaustible storehouse of riches; the supply will never
run short. Original Substance is alive with creative energy, and is
constantly producing more forms. When the supply of building material
is exhausted, more will be produced; when the soil is exhausted so that
foodstuffs and materials for clothing will no longer grow upon it, it
will be renewed or more soil will be made. When all the gold and silver
has been dug from the earth, if man is still in such a stage of social
development that he needs gold and silver, more will be produced from
the Formless. The Formless Stuff responds to the needs of man; it will
not let him be without any good thing.

This is true of man collectively; the race as a whole is always
abundantly rich, and if individuals are poor, it is because they do not
follow the Certain Way of doing things which makes the individual man
rich.

The Formless Stuff is intelligent; it is stuff which thinks. It is
alive, and is always impelled toward more life.

It is the natural and inherent impulse of life to seek to live more; it
is the nature of intelligence to enlarge itself, and of consciousness
to seek to extend its boundaries and find fuller expression. The
universe of forms has been made by Formless Living Substance, throwing
itself into form in order to express itself more fully.

The universe is a great Living Presence, always moving inherently
toward more life and fuller functioning.

Nature is formed for the advancement of life; its impelling motive is
the increase of life. For this cause, everything which can possibly
minister to life is bountifully provided; there can be no lack unless
God is to contradict himself and nullify his own works.

You are not kept poor by lack in the supply of riches; it is a fact
which I shall demonstrate a little farther on that even the resources
of the Formless Supply are at the command of the man or woman who will
act and think in a Certain Way.




CHAPTER IV. THE FIRST PRINCIPLE IN THE SCIENCE OF GETTING RICH.


Thought is the only power which can produce tangible riches from
the Formless Substance. The stuff from which all things are made is
a substance which thinks, and a thought of form in this substance
produces the form.

Original Substance moves according to its thoughts; every form and
process you see in nature is the visible expression of a thought in
Original Substance. As the Formless Stuff thinks of a form, it takes
that form; as it thinks of a motion, it makes that motion. That is the
way all things were created. We live in a thought world, which is part
of a thought universe.

The thought of a moving universe extended throughout Formless
Substance, and the Thinking Stuff moving according to that thought,
took the form of systems of planets, and maintains that form. Thinking
Substance takes the form of its thought, and moves according to the
thought. Holding the idea of a circling system of suns and worlds, it
takes the form of these bodies, and moves them as it thinks. Thinking
the form of a slow-growing oak tree, it moves accordingly, and produces
the tree, though centuries may be required to do the work. In creating,
the Formless seems to move according to the lines of motion it has
established; the thought of an oak tree does not cause the instant
formation of a full-grown tree, but it does start in motion the forces
which will produce the tree, along established lines of growth.

Every thought of form, held in thinking Substance, causes the creation
of the form, but always, or at least generally, along lines of growth
and action already established.

The thought of a house of a certain construction, if it were impressed
upon Formless Substance, might not cause the instant formation of the
house; but it would cause the turning of creative energies already
working in trade and commerce into such channels as to result in the
speedy building of the house. And if there were no existing channels
through which the creative energy could work, then the house would be
formed directly from primal substance, without waiting for the slow
processes of the organic and inorganic world.

_No thought of form can be impressed upon Original Substance without
causing the creation of the form._

Man is a thinking center, and can originate thought. All the forms that
man fashions with his hands must first exist in his thought; he cannot
shape a thing until he has thought that thing.

And so far man has confined his efforts wholly to the work of his
hands; he has applied manual labor to the world of forms, seeking to
change or modify those already existing. He has never thought of trying
to cause the creation of new forms by impressing his thoughts upon
Formless Substance.

When man has a thought-form, he takes material from the forms of
nature, and makes an image of the form which is in his mind. He has, so
far, made little or no effort to co-operate with Formless Intelligence;
to work “with the Father.” He has not dreamed that he can “do what he
seeth the Father doing.” Man re-shapes and modifies existing forms by
manual labor; he has given no attention to the question whether he
may not produce things from Formless Substance by communicating his
thoughts to it. We propose to prove that he may do so; to prove that
any man or woman may do so, and to show how. As our first step, we
must lay down three fundamental propositions.

First, we assert that there is one original formless stuff, or
substance, from which all things are made. All the seemingly many
elements are but different presentations of one element; all the
many forms found in organic and inorganic nature are but different
shapes, made from the same stuff. And this stuff is thinking stuff;
a thought held in it produces the form of the thought. Thought, in
thinking substance, produces shapes. Man is a thinking center, capable
of original thought; if man can communicate his thought to original
thinking substance, he can cause the creation, or formation, of the
thing he thinks about. To summarize this:--

_There is a thinking stuff from which all things are made, and which,
in its original state, permeates, penetrates, and fills the interspaces
of the universe._

_A thought, in this substance, produces the thing that is imaged by
the thought._

_Man can form things in his thought, and, by impressing his thought
upon formless substance, can cause the thing he thinks about to be
created._

It may be asked if I can prove these statements; and without going into
details, I answer that I can do so, both by logic and experience.

Reasoning back from the phenomena of form and thought, I come to one
original thinking substance; and reasoning forward from this thinking
substance, I come to man’s power to cause the formation of the thing he
thinks about.

And by experiment, I find the reasoning true; and this is my strongest
proof.

If one man who reads this book gets rich by doing what it tells him to
do, that is evidence in support of my claim; but if every man who does
what it tells him to do gets rich, that is positive proof until some
one goes through the process and fails. The theory is true until the
process fails; and this process will not fail, for every man who does
exactly what this book tells him to do will get rich.

I have said that men get rich by doing things in a Certain Way; and in
order to do so, men must become able to think in a certain way.

_A man’s way of doing things is the direct result of the way he thinks
about things._

To do things in the way you want to do them, you will have to acquire
the ability to think the way you want to think; this is the first step
toward getting rich.

_To think what you want to think is to think TRUTH, regardless of
appearances._

Every man has the natural and inherent power to think what he wants to
think, but it requires far more effort to do so than it does to think
the thoughts which are suggested by appearances. To think according
to appearances is easy; to think truth regardless of appearances is
laborious, and requires the expenditure of more power than any other
work man is called upon to perform.

There is no labor from which most people shrink as they do from that
of sustained and consecutive thought; it is the hardest work in the
world. This is especially true when truth is contrary to appearances.
Every appearance in the visible world tends to produce a corresponding
form in the mind which observes it; and this can only be prevented by
holding the thought of the TRUTH.

To look upon the appearance of disease will produce the form of disease
in your own mind, and ultimately in your body, unless you hold the
thought of the truth, which is that there is no disease; it is only an
appearance, and the reality is health.

To look upon the appearances of poverty will produce corresponding
forms in your own mind, unless you hold to the truth that there is no
poverty; there is only abundance.

To think health when surrounded by the appearances of disease, or to
think riches when in the midst of appearances of poverty, requires
power; but he who acquires this power becomes a MASTER MIND. He can
conquer fate; he can have what he wants.

This power can only be acquired by getting hold of the basic fact which
is behind all appearances; and that fact is that there is one Thinking
Substance, from which and by which all things are made.

Then we must grasp the truth that every thought held in this substance
becomes a form, and that man can so impress his thoughts upon It as to
cause them to take form and become visible things.

When we realize this, we lose all doubt and fear, for we know that we
can create what we want to create; we can get what we want to have, and
can become what we want to be. As a first step toward getting rich, you
must believe the three fundamental statements given previously in this
chapter; and in order to emphasize them, I repeat them here:--

_There is a thinking stuff from which all things are made, and which,
in its original state, permeates, penetrates, and fills the interspaces
of the universe._

_A thought, in this substance, produces the thing that is imaged by the
thought._

_Man can form things in his thought, and, by impressing his thought
upon formless substance, can cause the thing he thinks about to be
created._

You must lay aside all other concepts of the universe than this
monistic one; and you must dwell upon this until it is fixed in
your mind, and has become your habitual thought. Read these creed
statements over and over again; fix every word upon your memory, and
meditate upon them until you firmly believe what they say. If a doubt
comes to you, cast it aside as a sin. Do not listen to arguments
against this idea; do not go to churches or lectures where a contrary
concept of things is taught or preached. Do not read magazines or books
which teach a different idea; if you get mixed up in your faith, all
your efforts will be in vain.

Do not ask why these things are true, nor speculate as to how they can
be true; simply take them on trust.

The science of getting rich begins with the absolute acceptance of this
faith.




CHAPTER V. INCREASING LIFE.


You must get rid of the last vestige of the old idea that there is a
Deity whose will it is that you should be poor, or whose purposes may
be served by keeping you in poverty.

The Intelligent Substance which is All, and in all, and which lives
in All and lives in you, is a consciously Living Substance. Being a
consciously living substance, It must have the natural and inherent
desire of every living intelligence for increase of life. Every living
thing must continually seek for the enlargement of its life, because
life, in the mere act of living, must increase itself.

A seed, dropped into the ground, springs into activity, and in the act
of living produces a hundred more seeds; life, by living, multiplies
itself. It is forever Becoming More; it must do so, if it continues to
be at all.

Intelligence is under this same necessity for continuous increase.
Every thought we think makes it necessary for us to think another
thought; consciousness is continually expanding. Every fact we learn
leads us to the learning of another fact; knowledge is continually
increasing. Every talent we cultivate brings to the mind the desire to
cultivate another talent; we are subject to the urge of life, seeking
expression, which ever drives us on to know more, to do more, and to be
more.

In order to know more, do more, and be more we must have more; we must
have things to use, for we learn, and do, and become, only by using
things. We must get rich, so that we can live more.

The desire for riches is simply the capacity for larger life seeking
fulfillment; every desire is the effort of an unexpressed possibility
to come into action. It is power seeking to manifest which causes
desire. That which makes you want more money is the same as that which
makes the plant grow; it is Life, seeking fuller expression.

The One Living Substance must be subject to this inherent law of all
life; it is permeated with the desire to live more; that is why it is
under the necessity of creating things.

The One Substance desires to live more in you; hence it wants you to
have all the things you can use.

It is the desire of God that you should get rich. He wants you to get
rich because he can express himself better through you if you have
plenty of things to use in giving him expression. He can live more in
you if you have unlimited command of the means of life.

The universe desires you to have everything you want to have.

Nature is friendly to your plans.

Everything is naturally for you.

Make up your mind that this is true.

It is essential, however, that _your purpose should harmonize with the
purpose that is in All_.

You must want real life, not mere pleasure or sensual gratification.
Life is the performance of function; and the individual really lives
only when he performs every function, physical, mental, and spiritual,
of which he is capable, without excess in any.

You do not want to get rich in order to live swinishly, for the
gratification of animal desires; that is not life. But the performance
of every physical function is a part of life, and no one lives
completely who denies the impulses of the body a normal and healthful
expression.

You do not want to get rich solely to enjoy mental pleasures, to get
knowledge, to gratify ambition, to outshine others, to be famous. All
these are a legitimate part of life, but the man who lives for the
pleasures of the intellect alone will only have a partial life, and he
will never be satisfied with his lot.

You do not want to get rich solely for the good of others, to lose
yourself for the salvation of mankind, to experience the joys of
philanthropy and sacrifice. The joys of the soul are only a part of
life; and they are no better or nobler than any other part.

You want to get rich in order that you may eat, drink, and be merry
when it is time to do these things; in order that you may surround
yourself with beautiful things, see distant lands, feed your mind, and
develop your intellect; in order that you may love men and do kind
things, and be able to play a good part in helping the world to find
truth.

But remember that extreme altruism is no better and no nobler than
extreme selfishness; both are mistakes.

Get rid of the idea that God wants you to sacrifice yourself for
others, and that you can secure his favor by doing so; God requires
nothing of the kind.

What he wants is that you should make the most of yourself, for
yourself, and for others; and _you can help others more by making the
most of yourself than in any other way_.

You can make the most of yourself only by getting rich; so it is right
and praiseworthy that you should give your first and best thought to
the work of acquiring wealth.

Remember, however, that the desire of Substance is for all, and its
movements must be for more life to all; it cannot be made to work for
less life to any, because it is equally in all, seeking riches and life.

Intelligent Substance will make things for you, but it will not take
things away from some one else and give them to you.

You must get rid of the thought of competition. You are to create, not
to compete for what is already created.

You do not have to take anything away from any one.

You do not have to drive sharp bargains.

You do not have to cheat, or to take advantage. You do not need to let
any man work for you for less than he earns.

You do not have to covet the property of others, or to look at it with
wishful eyes; no man has anything of which you cannot have the like,
and that without taking what he has away from him.

You are to become a creator, not a competitor; you are going to get
what you want, but in such a way that when you get it every other man
will have more than he has now.

I am aware that there are men who get a vast amount of money by
proceeding in direct opposition to the statements in the paragraph
above, and may add a word of explanation here. Men of the plutocratic
type, who become very rich, do so sometimes purely by their
extraordinary ability on the plane of competition; and sometimes
they unconsciously relate themselves to Substance in its great
purposes and movements for the general racial upbuilding through
industrial evolution. Rockefeller, Carnegie, Morgan, _et al._, have
been the unconscious agents of the Supreme in the necessary work of
systematizing and organizing productive industry; and in the end, their
work will contribute immensely toward increased life for all. Their
day is nearly over; they have organized production, and _will soon
be succeeded by the agents of the multitude, who will organize the
machinery of distribution_.

The multi-millionaires are like the monster reptiles of the prehistoric
eras; they play a necessary part in the evolutionary process, but the
same Power which produced them will dispose of them. And it is well to
bear in mind that they have never been really rich; a record of the
private lives of most of this class will show that they have really
been the most abject and wretched of the poor.

Riches secured on the competitive plane are never satisfactory and
permanent; they are yours to-day, and another’s to-morrow. Remember, if
you are to become rich in a scientific and certain way, you must rise
entirely out of the competitive thought. You must never think for a
moment that the supply is limited. Just as soon as you begin to think
that all the money is being “cornered” and controlled by bankers and
others, and that you must exert yourself to get laws passed to stop
this process, and so on; in that moment you drop into the competitive
mind, and your power to cause creation is gone for the time being; and
what is worse, you will probably arrest the creative movements you have
already instituted.

KNOW that there are countless millions of dollars’ worth of gold in the
mountains of the earth, not yet brought to light; and know that if
there were not, more would be created from Thinking Substance to supply
your needs.

KNOW that the money you need will come, even if it is necessary for a
thousand men to be led to the discovery of new gold mines to-morrow.

_Never look at the visible supply; look always at the limitless riches
in Formless Substance, and KNOW that they are coming to you as fast as
you can receive and use them._ Nobody, by cornering the visible supply,
can prevent you from getting what is yours.

So never allow yourself to think for an instant that all the best
building spots will be taken before you get ready to build your house,
unless you hurry. Never worry about the trusts and combines, and get
anxious for fear they will soon come to own the whole earth. Never
get afraid that you will lose what you want because some other person
“beats you to it.” That cannot possibly happen; you are not seeking
anything that is possessed by anybody else; you are causing what you
want to be created from Formless Substance, and the supply is without
limits. Stick to the formulated statement:--

_There is a thinking stuff from which all things are made, and which,
in its original state, permeates, penetrates, and fills the interspaces
of the universe._

_A thought, in this substance, produces the thing that is imaged by the
thought._

_Man can form things in his thought, and, by impressing his thought
upon formless substance, can cause the thing he thinks about to be
created._




CHAPTER VI. HOW RICHES COME TO YOU.


When I say that you do not have to drive sharp bargains, I do not mean
that you do not have to drive any bargains at all, or that you are
above the necessity for having any dealings with your fellow men. I
mean that you will not need to deal with them unfairly; you do not have
to get something for nothing, _but can give to every man more than you
take from him_.

You cannot give every man more in cash market value than you take
from him, but you can give him more in use value than the cash value
of the thing you take from him. The paper, ink, and other material in
this book may not be worth the money you paid for it; but if the ideas
suggested by it bring you thousands of dollars, you have not been
wronged by those who sold it to you; they have given you a great use
value for a small cash value.

Let us suppose that I own a picture by one of the great artists, which,
in any civilized community, is worth thousands of dollars. I take it to
Baffin Bay, and by “salesmanship” induce an Eskimo to give a bundle of
furs worth $500 for it. I have really wronged him, for he has no use
for the picture; it has no use value to him; it will not add to his
life.

But suppose I give him a gun worth $50 for his furs; then he has made
a good bargain. He has use for the gun; it will get him many more furs
and much food; it will add to his life in every way; it will make him
rich.

When you rise from the competitive to the creative plane, you can scan
your business transactions very strictly, and if you are selling any
man anything which does not add more to his life than the thing he
gives you in exchange, you can afford to stop it. You do not have to
beat anybody in business. And if you are in a business which does beat
people, get out of it at once.

Give every man more in use value than you take from him in cash
value; then you are adding to the life of the world by every business
transaction.

If you have people working for you, you must take from them more in
cash value than you pay them in wages; but _you can so organize your
business that it will be filled with the principle of advancement_, and
so that each employee who wishes to do so may advance a little every
day.

You can make your business do for your employees what this book is
doing for you. You can so conduct your business that it will be a sort
of ladder, by which every employee who will take the trouble may climb
to riches himself; and given the opportunity, if he will not do so it
is not your fault.

And finally, because you are to cause the creation of your riches from
Formless Substance which permeates all your environment, it does not
follow that they are to take shape from the atmosphere and come into
being before your eyes.

If you want a sewing machine, for instance, I do not mean to tell you
that you are to impress the thought of a sewing machine on Thinking
Substance until the machine is formed without hands, in the room where
you sit, or elsewhere. But if you want a sewing machine, hold the
mental image of it with the most positive certainty that it is being
made, or is on its way to you. After once forming the thought, have
the most absolute and unquestioning faith that the sewing machine is
coming; never think of it, or speak of it, in any other way than as
being sure to arrive. Claim it as already yours.

It will be brought to you by the power of the Supreme Intelligence,
acting upon the minds of men. If you live in Maine, it may be that a
man will be brought from Texas or Japan to engage in some transaction
which will result in your getting what you want.

If so, the whole matter will be as much to that man’s advantage as it
is to yours.

Do not forget for a moment that the Thinking Substance is through all,
in all, communicating with all, and can influence all. The desire of
Thinking Substance for fuller life and better living has caused the
creation of all the sewing machines already made; and it can cause the
creation of millions more, and will, whenever men set it in motion by
desire and faith, and by acting in a Certain Way.

You can certainly have a sewing machine in your house; and it is just
as certain that you can have any other thing or things which you want,
and which you will use for the advancement of your own life and the
lives of others.

You need not hesitate about asking largely; “it is your Father’s
pleasure to give you the kingdom,” said Jesus.

Original Substance wants to live all that is possible in you, and wants
you to have all that you can or will use for the living of the most
abundant life.

If you fix upon your consciousness the fact that the desire you feel
for the possession of riches is one with the desire of Omnipotence for
more complete expression, your faith becomes invincible.

Once I saw a little boy sitting at a piano, and vainly trying to bring
harmony out of the keys; and I saw that he was grieved and provoked
by his inability to play real music. I asked him the cause of his
vexation, and he answered, “I can feel the music in me, but I can’t
make my hands go right.” The music in him was the URGE of Original
Substance, containing all the possibilities of all life; all that there
is of music was seeking expression through the child.

God, the One Substance, is trying to live and do and enjoy things
through humanity. He is saying, “I want hands to build wonderful
structures, to play divine harmonies, to paint glorious pictures; I
want feet to run my errands, eyes to see my beauties, tongues to tell
mighty truths and to sing marvelous songs,” and so on.

All that there is of possibility is seeking expression through men.
God wants those who can play music to have pianos and every other
instrument, and to have the means to cultivate their talents to the
fullest extent; He wants those who can appreciate beauty to be able
to surround themselves with beautiful things; He wants those who can
discern truth to have every opportunity to travel and observe; He wants
those who can appreciate dress to be beautifully clothed, and those who
can appreciate good food to be luxuriously fed.

He wants all these things because it is Himself that enjoys and
appreciates them; it is God who wants to play, and sing, and enjoy
beauty, and proclaim truth, and wear fine clothes, and eat good foods.

“It is God that worketh in you to will and to do,” said Paul.

The desire you feel for riches is the Infinite, seeking to express
Himself in you as He sought to find expression in the little boy at the
piano.

So you need not hesitate to ask largely.

Your part is to focalize and express the desires of God.

This is a difficult point with most people; they retain something of
the old idea that poverty and self-sacrifice are pleasing to God. They
look upon poverty as a part of the plan, a necessity of nature. They
have the idea that God has finished His work, and made all that He
can make, and that the majority of men must stay poor because there
is not enough to go around. They hold to so much of this erroneous
thought that they feel ashamed to ask for wealth; they try not to want
more than a very modest competence, just enough to make them fairly
comfortable.

I recall now the case of one student who was told that he must get in
mind a clear picture of the things he desired, so that the creative
thought of them might be impressed on Formless Substance. He was a very
poor man, living in a rented house, and having only what he earned
from day to day; and he could not grasp the fact that all wealth was
his. So, after thinking the matter over, he decided that he might
reasonably ask for a new rug for the floor of his best room, and an
anthracite coal stove to heat the house during the cold weather.
Following the instructions given in this book, he obtained these things
in a few months; and then it dawned upon him that he had not asked
enough. He went through the house in which he lived, and planned all
the improvements he would like to make in it; he mentally added a bay
window here and a room there, until it was complete in his mind as his
ideal home; and then he planned its furnishings.

Holding the whole picture in his mind, he began living in the Certain
Way, and moving toward what he wanted; and he owns the house now, and
is rebuilding it after the form of his mental image. And now, with
still larger faith, he is going on to get greater things. It has been
unto him according to his faith, and it is so with you and with all of
us.




CHAPTER VII. GRATITUDE.


The illustrations given in the last chapter will have conveyed to the
reader the fact that the first step toward getting rich is to convey
the idea of your wants to the Formless Substance.

This is true, and you will see that in order to do so it becomes
necessary to relate yourself to the Formless Intelligence in a
harmonious way.

To secure this harmonious relation is a matter of such primary and
vital importance that I shall give some space to its discussion here,
and give you instructions which, if you will follow them, will be
certain to bring you into perfect unity of mind with God.

The whole process of mental adjustment and atonement can be summed up
in one word, _gratitude_.

First, you believe that there is one Intelligent Substance, from which
all things proceed; second, you believe that this Substance gives
you everything you desire; and third, you relate yourself to It by a
feeling of deep and profound gratitude.

Many people who order their lives rightly in all other ways are kept
in poverty by their lack of gratitude. Having received one gift from
God, they cut the wires which connect them with Him by failing to make
acknowledgment.

It is easy to understand that the nearer we live to the source of
wealth, the more wealth we shall receive; and it is easy also to
understand that the soul that is always grateful lives in closer
touch with God than the one which never looks to Him in thankful
acknowledgment.

The more gratefully we fix our minds on the Supreme when good things
come to us, the more good things we will receive, and the more rapidly
they will come; and the reason simply is that the mental attitude of
gratitude draws the mind into closer touch with the source from which
the blessings come.

If it is a new thought to you that gratitude brings your whole mind
into closer harmony with the creative energies of the universe,
consider it well, and you will see that it is true. The good things you
already have have come to you along the line of obedience to certain
laws. Gratitude will lead your mind out along the ways by which things
come; and it will keep you in close harmony with creative thought and
prevent you from falling into competitive thought.

Gratitude alone can keep you looking toward the All, and prevent you
from falling into the error of thinking of the supply as limited; and
to do that would be fatal to your hopes.

There is a Law of Gratitude, and it is absolutely necessary that you
should observe the law, if you are to get the results you seek.

The law of gratitude is the natural principle that action and reaction
are always equal, and in opposite directions.

The grateful outreaching of your mind in thankful praise to the Supreme
_is a liberation or expenditure of force; it cannot fail to reach that
to which it is addressed, and the reaction is an instantaneous movement
toward you_.

“Draw nigh unto God, and He will draw nigh unto you.” That is a
statement of psychological truth.

And if your gratitude is strong and constant, the reaction in Formless
Substance will be strong and continuous; the movement of the things you
want will be always toward you. Notice the grateful attitude that Jesus
took; how He always seems to be saying, “I thank Thee, Father, that
Thou hearest me.” You cannot exercise much power without gratitude;
for it is gratitude that keeps you connected with Power.

But the value of gratitude does not consist solely in getting you more
blessings in the future. Without gratitude you cannot long keep from
dissatisfied thought regarding things as they are.

The moment you permit your mind to dwell with dissatisfaction upon
things as they are, you begin to lose ground. You fix attention upon
the common, the ordinary, the poor, and the squalid and mean; and your
mind takes the form of these things. Then you will transmit these
forms or mental images to the Formless, and the common, the poor, the
squalid, and mean will come to you.

To permit your mind to dwell upon the inferior is to become inferior
and to surround yourself with inferior things.

On the other hand, to fix your attention on the best is to surround
yourself with the best, and to become the best.

The Creative Power within us makes us into the image of that to which
we give our attention.

We are Thinking Substance, and thinking substance always takes the form
of that which it thinks about.

The grateful mind is constantly fixed upon the best; therefore it tends
to become the best; it takes the form or character of the best, and
will receive the best.

Also, faith is born of gratitude. The grateful mind continually expects
good things, and expectation becomes faith. The reaction of gratitude
upon one’s own mind produces faith; and every outgoing wave of grateful
thanksgiving increases faith. He who has no feeling of gratitude cannot
long retain a living faith; and without a living faith you cannot get
rich by the creative method, as we shall see in the following chapters.

It is necessary, then, to cultivate the habit of being grateful for
every good thing that comes to you; and to give thanks continuously.

And because all things have contributed to your advancement, you should
include all things in your gratitude.

Do not waste time thinking or talking about the shortcomings or wrong
actions of plutocrats or trust magnates. Their organization of the
world has made your opportunity; all you get really comes to you
because of them.

Do not rage against corrupt politicians; if it were not for politicians
we should fall into anarchy, and your opportunity would be greatly
lessened.

God has worked a long time and very patiently to bring us up to where
we are in industry and government, and He is going right on with
His work. There is not the least doubt that He will do away with
plutocrats, trust magnates, captains of industry, and politicians as
soon as they can be spared; but in the meantime, behold they are all
very good. Remember that they are all helping to arrange the lines of
transmission along which your riches will come to you, and be grateful
to them all. This will bring you into harmonious relations with the
good in everything, and the good in everything will move toward you.




CHAPTER VIII. THINKING IN THE CERTAIN WAY.


Turn back to chapter VI., and read again the story of the man who
formed a mental image of his house, and you will get a fair idea of the
initial step toward getting rich. You must form a clear and definite
mental picture of what you want; you cannot transmit an idea unless you
have it yourself.

You must have it before you can give it; and many people fail to
impress Thinking Substance because they have themselves only a vague
and misty concept of the things they want to do, to have, or to become.

It is not enough that you should have a general desire for wealth “to
do good with”; everybody has that desire.

It is not enough that you should have a wish to travel, see things,
live more, etc. Everybody has those desires also. If you were going to
send a wireless message to a friend, you would not send the letters
of the alphabet in their order, and let him construct the message for
himself; nor would you take words at random from the dictionary. You
would send a coherent sentence; one which meant something. When you try
to impress your wants upon Substance, remember that it must be done by
a coherent statement; you must know what you want, and be definite.

You can never get rich, or start the creative power into action, by
sending out unformed longings and vague desires.

Go over your desires just as the man I have described went over his
house; see just what you want, and get a clear mental picture of it as
you wish it to look when you get it.

That clear mental picture you must have continually in mind, as the
sailor has in mind the port toward which he is sailing the ship; you
must keep your face toward it all the time. You must no more lose sight
of it than the steersman loses sight of the compass.

It is not necessary to take exercises in concentration, nor to set
apart special times for prayer and affirmation, nor to “go into the
silence,” nor to do occult stunts of any kind. These things are well
enough, but all you need is to know what you want, and to want it badly
enough so that it will stay in your thoughts.

Spend as much of your leisure time as you can in contemplating your
picture, but no one needs to take exercises to concentrate his mind on
a thing which he really wants; it is the things you do not really care
about which require effort to fix your attention upon them.

And unless you really want to get rich, so that the desire is strong
enough to hold your thoughts directed to the purpose as the magnetic
pole holds the needle of the compass, it will hardly be worth while for
you to try to carry out the instructions given in this book.

The methods herein set forth are for people whose desire for riches is
strong enough to overcome mental laziness and the love of ease, and
make them work.

The more clear and definite you make your picture, then, and the
more you dwell upon it, bringing out all its delightful details, the
stronger your desire will be; and the stronger your desire, the easier
it will be to hold your mind fixed upon the picture of what you want.

Something more is necessary, however, than merely to see the picture
clearly. If that is all you do, you are only a dreamer, and will have
little or no power for accomplishment.

Behind your clear vision must be the purpose to realize it; to bring it
out in tangible expression.

And behind this purpose must be an invincible and unwavering FAITH
that the thing is already yours; that it is “at hand” and you have only
to take possession of it.

Live in the new house, mentally, until it takes form around you
physically. In the mental realm, enter at once into full enjoyment of
the things you want.

“Whatsoever things ye ask for when ye pray, believe that ye receive
them, and ye shall have them,” said Jesus.

See the things you want as if they were actually around you all the
time; see yourself as owning and using them. Make use of them in
imagination just as you will use them when they are your tangible
possessions. Dwell upon your mental picture until it is clear and
distinct, and then take the Mental Attitude of Ownership toward
everything in that picture. Take possession of it, in mind, in the full
faith that it is actually yours. Hold to this mental ownership; do not
waver for an instant in the faith that it is real.

And remember what was said in a preceding chapter about gratitude; be
as thankful for it all the time as you expect to be when it has taken
form. The man who can sincerely thank God for the things which as yet
he owns only in imagination, has real faith. He will get rich; he will
cause the creation of whatsoever he wants.

You do not need to pray repeatedly for the things you want; it is not
necessary to tell God about it every day.

“Use not vain repetitions as the heathen do,” said Jesus to His pupils,
“for your Father knoweth that ye have need of these things before ye
ask Him.”

Your part is to intelligently formulate your desire for the things
which make for a larger life, and to get these desires arranged into a
coherent whole; and then to impress this Whole Desire upon the Formless
Substance, which has the power and the will to bring you what you want.

You do not make this impression by repeating strings of words; you make
it by holding the vision with unshakable PURPOSE to attain it, and with
steadfast FAITH that you do attain it.

The answer to prayer is not according to your faith while you are
talking, but according to your faith while you are working.

You cannot impress the mind of God by having a special Sabbath day set
apart to tell Him what you want, and then forgetting Him during the
rest of the week. You cannot impress Him by having special hours to go
into your closet and pray, if you then dismiss the matter from your
mind until the hour of prayer comes again.

Oral prayer is well enough, and has its effect, especially upon
yourself, in clarifying your vision and strengthening your faith; but
it is not your oral petitions which get you what you want. In order to
get rich you do not need a “sweet hour of prayer”; you need to “pray
without ceasing.” And by prayer I mean holding steadily to your vision,
with the purpose to cause its creation into solid form, and the faith
that you are doing so.

“Believe that ye _receive_ them.”

The whole matter turns on receiving, once you have clearly formed
your vision. When you _have_ formed it, it is well to make an oral
statement, addressing the Supreme in reverent prayer; and from that
moment you must, in mind, receive what you ask for. Live in the new
house; wear the fine clothes; ride in the automobile; go on the
journey, and confidently plan for greater journeys. Think and speak of
all the things you have asked for in terms of actual present ownership.
Imagine an environment, and a financial condition exactly as you want
them, and live all the time in that imaginary environment and financial
condition. Mind, however, that you do not do this as a mere dreamer
and castle builder; hold to the FAITH that the imaginary is being
realized, and to the PURPOSE to realize it. Remember that it is faith
and purpose in the use of the imagination which make the difference
between the scientist and the dreamer. And having learned this fact, it
is here that you must learn the proper use of the Will.
